
# Introduction

Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data analysis is at the core of the current quest to describe all human cell types.
The annotation of cell events in scRNA-seq is commonly done using some variatino of the following steps (Luecken and Theis 2019):

- Cluster cells
- Find clusters markers.
- Annotate clusters based on known markers.

The annotations are reported in legends alongside tSNE and UMAP plots, and in metadata files in columns that give each cell a single type label. 

Two of the tasks that scientists are interested in are (1) mapping cells in a dataset to _known_ cell types and 
(2) discover _new_ groupings with biological relevance. 

By biological relevance, we mean that similar cells might be found in other studies, and help building predictions about reality. 


Here we focus on the second task: the discovery of new groups. 

Final cluster annotations might point out rare, uniform populations, and have been used sucessfully to identify new types, like the airway ionocytes.  (Plasschaert et al. 2018)(Montoro et al. 2018).

Another approach for proposing new classifications is to use hierarchical clustering, and thus provide a multilevel perspective on cell identity.
An example is the description of the human middle temporal gyrus by Hodge et al ([@wikidata:Q71306466]), where a single-hierarchy ontology is provided both in a main figure and a supplementary file. 

While such works are already groundbreaking, we identified a gap: current works seldom explore the multi-hierarchy clustering. 

We are used to tree-like classifications, a natural side-effect of the macroevolutionary process of vertebrates. Cell type classifications, though, are not tree-like and many cell types have more than one direct parent. [@wikidata:Q21184168]  

```
Figure not a tree ? 
```

Towards that goal, we build _fcoex_, an R package that builds coexpression networks as an scaffold for hypothesis generation about cell types, and describe its application to some datasets. 

