# Discussion 
Here we report a pipeline to explore cell type divesity via ranked, lean coexpression modules. 
In contrast to unranked, large modules found by WGCNA-based pipelines (Langfelder and Horvath 2008a), fcoex modules makes it easy for domain experts to take advantage of the data. 
For example, in this work, a master's student could pinpoint the 4 genes of the apela/Toddler pathway floating on an 18-gene gene set. He would surely have had more trouble finding a biologically meaningful association in a set with hundreds of genes.

Recent works are starting to introduce coexpression analysis to the single-cell workflow. 
The monocle R package (https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2859), widely used for pseudotime analysis, has implemented module-based analysis for its version 3, using the Louvain community detection algorithm to get modules from UMAP dimensions.(https://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/monocle3/docs/differential/#gene-modules). 
Another tool, MTGO-sc, exploits Gene Ontology information to aid in building modules, focusing on each cluters (Nazzicari et al. 2019). 


Fcoex differs from previous works in two fundamental aspects: (1) it explicitly regroups the cells, and (2) it generates modules with negative correlations.
The explicit regrouping hints at higher organization levels, which provide another window into the biologiclal divesity.
The "cell type forests" obtained with the parallel reclustering of cells sheds light at higher orders of classifications. 
The approach supported our "rediscovery" of B-cells as both a cell type on their own, but also as a subclass of Antigen Presenting Cells. In that way, fcoex offers ways to explore data-driven classifications of cells, aligning itself with the challenges of the Human Cell Atlas and, specifically, of building ontologies of cell types in the single-cell era. (ADD REFERENCES)
